site/content/_index.md, before:

---
title: "Home"
pagetitle: Neasa Hourigan T.D.
subtitle: Restrictions on Maternity Care
subtitlelink: /post/restrictions-on-maternity-care/
image: /img/073A2409.jpg
blurb:
    heading: "Who am I?"
    text: "Neasa Hourigan is the Green Party TD for Dublin Central (formally councillor for Cabra-Glasnevin). Neasa is Green Party Finance & Health Spokesperson and Chair of Policy Council. She has a professional background as a specialist in creating sustainable communities and was a university lecturer in environmental development and design. She and her family have lived in Cabra, Dublin 7 for 15 years."
intro:
    heading: "My priorities"
    text: "'I want to live in a country where we all can enjoy safe streets, a decent roof over our heads, peace and equal opportunities. I believe passionately that green principles are a pathway towards a more compassionate, equitable and environmentally responsible society. If you want a better future for you, your family, children and neighbours and aspire to make our communities the best place to live in Dublin then I would love you to consider supporting me in the upcoming general election."
products:
    - heading: "Decent, affordable housing"
    - heading: "A livable, active city"
    - heading: "A more sustainable future"
---

Commit message:

Update lead link, Phoenix Park options

site/content/_index.md, after:

---
title: "Home"
pagetitle: Neasa Hourigan T.D.
subtitle: Public meeting on Phoenix Park Transport and Mobility Options
subtitlelink: /post/public-meeting-on-phoenix-park-transport-and-mobility-options-consultation/
image: /img/073A2409.jpg
blurb:
    heading: "Who am I?"
    text: "Neasa Hourigan is the Green Party TD for Dublin Central (formally councillor for Cabra-Glasnevin). Neasa is Green Party Finance & Health Spokesperson and Chair of Policy Council. She has a professional background as a specialist in creating sustainable communities and was a university lecturer in environmental development and design. She and her family have lived in Cabra, Dublin 7 for 15 years."
intro:
    heading: "My priorities"
    text: "'I want to live in a country where we all can enjoy safe streets, a decent roof over our heads, peace and equal opportunities. I believe passionately that green principles are a pathway towards a more compassionate, equitable and environmentally responsible society. If you want a better future for you, your family, children and neighbours and aspire to make our communities the best place to live in Dublin then I would love you to consider supporting me in the upcoming general election."
products:
    - heading: "Decent, affordable housing"
    - heading: "A livable, active city"
    - heading: "A more sustainable future"
---
